#summary Setting up the ES development environment using the setup script

= Setting up the ES development environment using the setup script =

If you have problems with building ES from the source code manually, please use the following setup shell script which tries to build ES semi-automatically:

  http://code.google.com/p/es-operating-system/source/browse/trunk/setup

Before running this script, please install the prerequisites listed in the DeveloperSetup page. You should also add 'es' to the operating system list in Automake's config.sub file as described in this page.

The !TrueType fonts listed in the DeveloperSetup page must also be installed somewhere under /usr/share/fonts directory if they are not installed yet. Unless you are using Fedora, you are most likely to do this step manually.

If you are using Mac OS X, please also install PCRE and wget in addition to XCode.

  cf. ftp://ftp.gnu.org/pub/gnu/wget/

The setup script tries to install ES into the following directory:

{{{
  /opt/es
}}}

Please make sure to create this directory with the appropriate permission. If you prefer to install ES to the other directory, please edit the setup script accordingly.

Then run the setup script:

{{{
% bash -v setup
}}}

It will download the required files from the Internet, build tools, libraries, and ES operating system in sequence, and run ES on QEMU. After the setup, the following directory structures will be created in
your home directory:

{{{
~/es/
+---local/                  # ES build directory for local tools
+---opt/                    # cross-tool build directory
    +---binutils/
    +---cairo/
    +---expat/
    +---fontconfig/
    +---freetype/
    +---gcc/
    +---pcre/
+---pc/                     # ES build directory for target (pc)
+---src/                    # open source program source dirctory
    +---binutils-2.18/
    +---cairo-1.4.10/
    +---expat-2.0.1/
    +---fontconfig-2.4.2/
    +---freetype-2.3.5/
    +---gcc-4.3.1/
    +---newlib-1.16.0/
    +---pcre-7.8/
+---trunk/                  # ES source directory
    +---cmd                 # application programs
    +---esidl               # esidl IDL compiler
    +---esjs                # esjs ECMAScript interpreter
    +---include
        +---es              # ES class libraries and template libraries
            +---base        # the common ES interface definitions
            +---device      # the device driver interface definitions
            +---naming      # the namespace interface definitions
            +---util        # miscellaneous interface definitions
    +---init                # the ES kernel image is created here
    +---os
        +---bootsect        # ES boot sectors and kernel loader
        +---fs              # file subsystems
            +---fat         # FAT file subsystem
            +---iso9660     # ISO 9660 file subsystem
        +---kernel          # ES kernel modules
            +---include
            +---pc          # PC specific portion
            +---port        # portable portion
            +---posix       # POSIX specific portion for the ES kernel emulation
            +---testsuite
        +---libes++         # ES class libraries and template libraries
        +---net             # TCP/IP protocol stack
            +---include
            +---src
            +---testsuite
    +---patches             # patch files applied to the cross-development tools and libraries needed by ES
    +---tools               # command line tools for cross development
}}}

----

*Note*: If you are using Ubuntu 7.10, please specify the `-net none` option to run ES on QEMU as below:

{{{
$ qemu -hda fat32.img -serial stdio -soundhw sb16 -net none
}}}

QEMU 0.9.0 comes with Ubuntu 7.10 seems to have a problem with the RTL8029AS Ethernet controller emulation.